A SIMPLER ENCODING OF INDEXED TYPES

arXiv:2103.15408v4 \[cs.PL\] 5 Jul 2021

TESLA ZHANG July 7, 2021

A BSTRACT. In functional programming languages, generalized algebraic
data types (GADTs) are very useful as the unnecessary pattern matching
over them can be ruled out by the failure of unification of type
arguments. In dependent type systems, this is usually called indexed
types and it's particularly useful as the identity type is a special
case of it. However, pattern matching over indexed types is very
complicated as it requires term unification in general. We study a
simplified version of indexed types (called simpler indexed types) where
we explicitly specify the selection process of constructors, and we
discuss its expressiveness, limitations, and properties.

1.  I NTRODUCTION Correct-by-construction data structures are pleasant
    to work with, such as welltyped and well-scoped syntax trees \[1\].
    A key aspect of correct-by-construction data structures is that they
    carry value-level information in their types. We start from two
    simple instances of such data structures: the finite set type and
    the sized vector type, which are base on the general notion of
    indexed types1: data Fin : N → Type0 where fzero : ∀ {n} → Fin
    (suc n) fsuc : ∀ {n} → Fin n → Fin (suc n) data Vect (A : Type ℓ) :
    N → Type ℓ where \[\] : Vect A 0 *::* : ∀ {n} → A → Vect A n → Vect
    A (suc n) The indices of types are the parameters at the
    right-hand-side of the colons in the signatures of inductive types,
    which can be specialized by constructors. The two constructors of
    Fin specify the index as suc n, so when pattern matching over Fin
    zero requires no clauses. The algorithm for selecting constructors
    is a process of term unification, extracting a most-general-unifier
    and apply that to the rest of the telescope. For each constructor,
    we unify the type arguments with the indices it specifies, and there
    are three potential results \[4, §2.1\]. • Success positively -- the
    constructor matches. • Success negatively -- the constructor does
    not matches. • Failure -- cannot decide, pattern matching cannot be
    performed. 1 This piece of code is written in Agda \[2\]. The types
    and functions are in blue while constructors are in green. There are
    other pieces of code written in Aya \[3\], where types are in green
    and constructors are in purple. In §2, we use the latter coloring.

1

2

TESLA ZHANG

Users will have to understand the error messages with unification
failures, which is an accidental complexity brought into dependent type
systems. The implementation of the unification algorithm also affects
the selection of constructors. We propose an alternative syntax for
indexed types. First, for inductive types without indices, we use a
Haskell-style syntax to describe its arguments, and we allow bindings in
the parameters since we are working with dependent types: data N : U \|
zero \| suc ( x : N )

data List ( A : U ) : U \| nil \| cons ( x : A) ( xs : List A)

Then, we allow the constructors to perform a pattern matching over the
type of the parameters. For instance, we define the sized vector type
using the following syntax: data Vec ( A : U ) (n : N ) : U \| A, zero ⇒
vnil \| A, suc n ⇒ vcons ( x : A) ( xs : Vec A n) This pattern matching
is not a traditional pattern matching, say, it does not need to be
covering (although in the Vec example it is) and it can contain
seemingly unreachable patterns (like duplicated patterns). Instead, they
represent the selection process of constructors directly. The type
checking of pattern matching consists of two steps: the well-typedness
of patterns and the exhaustiveness of the patterns. We exemplify the
type checking of our encoding of indexed types by describing the pattern
matching over Vec N n. First, it tries to match the terms N, n with the
patterns A, zero and A, suc n. The pattern matching has three potential
results, similar to the term unification problem: • Success positively
-- the patterns are matched, this constructor will be available (needs
to be matched). • Success negatively -- the patterns do not match, this
constructor is not available (does not need to be matched). • Failure --
the pattern matching gets stuck, pattern matching cannot be performed.
However, pattern matching is a basic construct in dependent type
systems, and it is decidable and terminating -- unlike the general term
unification problem, where we normally give up higher-order cases to
avoid undecidability. It is also more friendly to general users because
they are required to understand one concept less. Another example is the
finite set type: data Fin (n : N ) : U \| suc n ⇒ fzero \| suc n ⇒ fsuc
( x : Fin n) 1.1. Problematic indexed types. We propose the new syntax
because the term unification problem generated by general indexed types
could be very complicated. Here are some examples of indexed types in
Agda that generate such unification problems:

A SIMPLER ENCODING OF INDEXED TYPES

3

data Univ : Type0 → Type1 where univ : ∀ u → Univ (u → N) data Higher :
(N → N) → Type0 where higher-suc : Higher suc higher-pred : Higher pred
higher-misc : Higher (λ x → 2 + x - 3) We cannot perform pattern
matching on the type Univ Bool since Agda cannot unify Bool and N (this
unification problem is related to the injectivity of type constructors,
see the discussion in \[5, §1\]). Similarly the unification problem may
become higher order (like in Higher -- neither Higher suc, Higher pred,
Higher (λ x → 2 + x - 3) could be pattern matched against!), generating
more confusing instances. These examples are impossible to construct
with simpler indexed types. With the proposed syntax, we could avoid not
only implementing such a complicated unification algorithm, but also
explaining these unification failures in error messages. 1.2.
Contributions.

• We present the syntax (§2.1) and the type checking algorithm (§2.3)
for simpler indexed types in §2. • We discuss their limitations (§3.1),
provide a translation of simpler indexed types to general indexed types
(§3.2), and discuss the compilation of simpler indexed types (§3.3) in
§3. • We explore potential extension to simpler indexed types (§4.1) and
compare it with similar work (§4.2) in §4. 2. F ORMALIZATION OF SIMPLER
INDEXED TYPES In this section, we describe the core language syntax and
the type checking of simpler indexed types. The coverage checking can be
adapted from any other dependent type systems with indexed types by
replacing the term unification with pattern matching, so we assume the
existence of a suitable coverage check. 2.1. Core language syntax. The
syntax of terms is presented in Fig. 2.1. It has spine-normal
fully-applied applications on "definitions" (including types D,
constructors c, and functions definitions f). Normal constructs such as
λ-abstraction and the Π-type are also available. ⇒ is used in
λ-abstractions instead of dots for consistency with function definitions
and pattern matching clauses. We use u to denote a list of expressions,
and ∅ when the list is empty. Case-split expressions can be encoded as
functions and can be easily added to our type theory, but they are
unrelated to simpler indexed types. Therefore, we omit them. We will
have two syntactic sugars for the Π-type: A → B for ( x : A) → B, and ∆
→ B for ( x1 : A1 ) → ( x2 : A2 ) → · · · → ( xn : An ) → B where ∆ = (
x i : Ai )∀ i∈\[1,n\]. The latter is only used in §3.2. The syntax for
definitions, contexts and signatures is defined in Fig. 2.2. A signature
is a list of declarations and a context is a list of bindings.
Constructors are with or without a list of patterns. The variables in
the same pattern are assumed to be distinct.

4

TESLA ZHANG

x, y ::= A, B, u, v ::= \| \| \| \| \|

fu xu Du cu ( x : A) → B λx ⇒ u

variable names full application to functions application to references
fully applied inductive type fully applied constructor Π-type lambda
abstraction

F IGURE 2.1. Syntax of terms Γ, ∆, Θ ::= decl ::= \| cons ::= \| cls ::=
p, q ::= \| \| Σ ::=

xi : Ai data D ∆ cons func f ∆ : A cls \| p⇒c∆ \|c∆ \|p⇒u cp x
impossible decl

context simpler indexed type function definition pattern matching
constructor constructor pattern matching clause constructor patterns
catch-all patterns absurd patterns signature

F IGURE 2.2. Syntax of signature and declarations We will borrow some
notational convention from \[6, §3.2\]2: u\[v/x \] for substituting
occurrences of x with v in term u. We use u\[v/x \] to denote a list of
substitutions applied sequentially to the term u. Substitution objects
are denoted as σ. We will assume the substitution operation defined on
terms, patterns, and substitutions. In the typing rules in §2.3, we will
omit the vertical bars in cons and cls which are intended to separate
the clauses and constructors. 2.2. Operations on terms. We also need
some operations on terms and patterns. All of them are defined by
induction on the syntax. We define vars(∆) to compute the list of
variables in ∆: vars(∅) := ∅ vars( x : A, ∆) := x, vars(∆) We define
vars( p) to compute the list of bindings in pattern p and vars( p) to
gather all the bindings in the patterns p. This operation requires the
well-typedness of the patterns because we need the types of the
bindings. We store these types into the patterns to allow accessing them
in this operation: 2Other styles of substitution include u \[ x 7 → v\],
u \[ x/v\], etc. (there is a relevant online discussion \[7\])

A SIMPLER ENCODING OF INDEXED TYPES

5

vars( x : A) := x : A vars(impossible) := ∅ vars(c p) := vars( p)
vars(∅) := ∅ vars( x : A, p) := x : A, vars( p) We define term( p) to
compute a term that matches exactly the pattern p and term( p) to
compute a list of terms matching exactly the patterns p. This requires p
to contain no impossible sub-patterns: term( x : A) := x term(c p) := c
term( p) term(∅) := ∅ term(q, p) := term(q), term( p) We define
matches(u, p) 7→ σ to perform pattern matching, similar to the M ATCH
and M ATCHES operations in \[8\]. It computes a substitution when the
pattern matching success positively and produces ⊥ when the pattern
matching success negatively. We will also define a version of this
operation to match a list of terms with a list of patterns matches(u, p)
7→ σ, similar to vars( p) and term( p).

matches(u, x ) 7→ \[u/x \]

matches(∅, ∅) 7→ \[\]

matches(u, p) 7→ ⊥ matches(c u, c p) 7→ ⊥ matches(u, p) 7→ ⊥ matches((v,
u), (q, p)) 7→ ⊥

matches(u, p) 7→ σ matches(c u, c p) 7→ σ

c1 6 = c2 matches(c1 u, c2 p) 7→ ⊥ matches(v, q) 7→ ⊥ matches((v, u),
(q, p)) 7→ ⊥

matches(u, p) 7→ σ matches(v, q) 7→ σ ′ matches((v, u), (q, p)) 7→ σ ⊎ σ
′ F IGURE 2.3. Pattern matching operation Lemma 2.1. For all pattern p,
matches(term( p), p) 7→ σ and for all list of patterns p, matches(term(
p), p) 7→ σ. In both formulae, the substitution σ is an identity
substitution. Proof. By induction on p.



2.3. Typing rules for terms. Well-typed terms are formed under the
following type checking judgments:

• Σ; Γ ⊢ ∆ ∆ is a well-formed context under Σ; Γ. • Σ; Γ ⊢ u : A term u
has type A under Σ; Γ.

6

TESLA ZHANG

• Σ; Γ ⊢ u : ∆ terms u instantiate context ∆ under Σ; Γ. • Σ; Γ ⊢ u = v
: A terms u and v are equal inhabitants of type A under Σ; Γ. Typing
rules for types and terms are defined in Fig. 2.4. They are grouped by
the relevant type formation. For simplicity, we will omit several
things:

• We assume the conversion check between terms -- the problem is the
same as other dependent type systems, and the strategies used by other
systems will apply to ours as well. • We also have the type-in-type rule
to simplify the universe types, and in practical implementations, we
could integrate polymorphic universe levels to make the system
consistent. • In the implementation of Aya and Arend, we also have the
sigma type and records, but we omit them here for simplicity. Rules
related to the Π-type. Σ; Γ ⊢ A : U Σ; Γ, x : A ⊢ B : U Σ; Γ ⊢ ( x : A)
→ B : U Σ; Γ, x : A ⊢ b : B\[ x/y\] Σ; Γ ⊢ λx ⇒ b : (y : A) → B

func f ∆ : A cls ∈ Σ Σ; Γ ⊢ v : ∆ Σ; Γ ⊢ f v : A\[v/vars(∆)\] Σ; Γ ⊢ u :
( x : A) → B Σ; Γ ⊢ v : A Σ; Γ ⊢ u v : B\[v/x \]

Rules related to indexed types. data D ∆ cons ∈ Σ Σ; Γ ⊢ u : ∆ Σ; Γ ⊢ D
u : U data D ∆ cons ∈ Σ Σ; Γ ⊢ u : ∆ c ∆c ∈ cons Σ; Γ ⊢ v : ∆c
\[u/vars(∆)\] C ON C ALL Σ; Γ ⊢ c v : D u data D ∆ cons ∈ Σ Σ; Γ ⊢ u : ∆
p ⇒ c ∆c ∈ cons matches(u, p) 7→ σ Σ; Γ ⊢ v : ∆c σ \[u/vars(∆)\] I X C
ALL Σ; Γ ⊢ c v : D u Rule for convertible types and type-in-type. Σ; Γ ⊢
a : A Σ; Γ ⊢ A = B : U Σ; Γ ⊢ a : B

Σ; Γ ⊢ U : U

F IGURE 2.4. Typing rules for types and terms In the I X C ALL rule, we
perform a pattern matching between the type arguments and the patterns
in the constructor to make sure the availability of the selected
constructor, and apply the resulting substitution to the parameters of
the constructor as they can access the patterns according to the rules
in Fig. 2.5. In contrast, the C ON C ALL rule does not perform pattern
matching and the constructor is directly

A SIMPLER ENCODING OF INDEXED TYPES

7

available. The differences between I X C ALL and C ON C ALL include a
successful matches(u, p) operation and an extra substitution applied on
∆c . 2.4. Signature well-formedness. A well-formed signature consists of
a list of welltyped declarations. We can think of the whole type
checking algorithm as a signature formation process. To check function
definitions and pattern matching constructors, we first need to type
check the patterns and elaborate the pattern matching clauses. The rules
of pattern type checking, similar to the operations in §2.2, have two
versions:

• Σ; Γ ⊢ p : A 7→ Θ type-checking a pattern p against a type A. • Σ; Γ ⊢
p : ∆ 7→ Θ type-checking patterns p against a context ∆. These rules are
defined in Fig. 2.5. They produce a context Θ containing all of the
bindings in the give pattern(s). Rules for one pattern. data D ∆ cons ∈
Σ c ∆c ∈ cons Σ; Γ ⊢ p : ∆c 7→ Θ Σ; Γ ⊢ c p : D u 7→ Θ

Σ; Γ ⊢ x : A 7→ x : A

data D ∆ cons ∈ Σ matches(u, q) 7→ σ Σ; Γ ⊢ p : ∆c σ 7→ Θ Σ; Γ ⊢ c p : D
u 7→ Θ

q ⇒ c ∆c ∈ cons

data D ∆ cons ∈ Σ

c ∆c ∈ / cons

(matches(u, p) 7→ ⊥)∀ p⇒c ∆c ∈cons Σ; Γ ⊢ impossible : D u 7→ Θ

Rules for a list of patterns. Σ; Γ ⊢ q : A 7→ Θ Σ; Γ ⊢ p : ∆\[term(q)/x
\] 7→ Θ′ Σ; Γ ⊢ q, p : ( x : A, ∆) 7→ Θ ⊎ Θ′

Σ; Γ ⊢ ∅ : ∅ 7→ ∅

F IGURE 2.5. Type checking of patterns Lemma 2.2. Σ; Γ ⊢ p : ∆ 7→ Θ =⇒
Σ; Γ ⊢ term( p) : ∆ and Σ; Γ ⊢ p : A 7→ Θ =⇒ Σ; Γ ⊢ term( p) : A. Proof.
By induction on p.



Then, we define the rules for type checking pattern matching structures
as in Fig. 2.6 using the operation defined in Fig. 2.5. Σ; Γ ⊢ p : ∆ 7→
Θ Σ; Γ, ∆, Θ ⊢ u : A\[term( p)/vars(∆)\] Σ; Γ ⊢ clause( p : ∆, u : A)

Σ; Γ, ∆, Θ ⊢ ∆c Σ; Γ ⊢ p : ∆ 7→ Θ Σ; Γ ⊢ clause( p : ∆, c ∆c )

F IGURE 2.6. Pattern matching structures

8

TESLA ZHANG

Σ; Γ ⊢ Σ; Γ ⊢ ∆ (Σ; Γ, ∆ ⊢ ∆c )∀(c ∆c )∈cons  Σ; Γ, ∆ ⊢ ∆c clause( p :
∆, c ∆c ) ∀( p⇒c ∆ )∈cons c

Σ, data D ∆ cons; Γ ⊢ Σ; Γ ⊢

Σ; Γ ⊢ ∆

(clause( p : ∆, u : A))∀ p⇒u∈cls

Σ, func f ∆ : A cls; Γ ⊢ F IGURE 2.7. Well-formedness of signature Σ
With them, we could define the type checking of function definitions and
simpler indexed types, and form signature by the rules Σ; Γ ⊢ in Fig.
2.7. The declarations are checked one after another so latter functions
can depend on former ones. By that, we will lose induction-recursion
\[9\] and induction-induction \[10\], and we consider it a potential
future work. 3. M ETATHEORY OF SIMPLER INDEXED TYPES In this section, we
discuss the limitations of simpler indexed types by examples and provide
a complete and sound translation from simpler indexed types to general
indexed types. 3.1. Limitations and workarounds. Many useful indexed
types cannot be written as simpler indexed types. For instance, as a
common illustration of the convenience brought by indexed types, the
normalizer and the syntax tree for an expression language with natural
numbers and booleans can be defined as a general indexed type in Agda
\[2\]. The syntax looks like this. We first define the type Term as a
type indexed by another type, which is the type of the evaluation result
of each syntax variant. In each constructor, we specialize this type.
data Term : Type0 → Type0 where nat : N → Term N succ : Term N → Term N
bool : Bool → Term Bool inv : Term Bool → Term Bool case : Term Bool →
(x y : Term A) → Term A Then, we define its normalize function, which
takes an instance of Term A and return an instance of type A. The type
guarantees that there will never be ill-typed terms like succ (bool x).
normalize : Term A → A normalize (nat x) =x normalize (bool x) =x
normalize (succ x) = suc (normalize x) normalize (inv t) = not
(normalize t) normalize (case b x y) = if (normalize b) then (normalize
x) else (normalize y)

A SIMPLER ENCODING OF INDEXED TYPES

9

We cannot encode Term as a simpler indexed type because we cannot
pattern match on types, so the direct translation will not work -- We
will need an auxiliary type to help us encoding them: data TermTy : U \|
natT \| boolT func termTy ( x : TermTy) : U \| natT ⇒ N \| boolT ⇒ Bool
Then, we define the type for terms and the normalize function: data Term
(n : TermTy) : U \| natT ⇒ nat N \| natT ⇒ succ (Term natT) \| boolT ⇒
bool boolT \| boolT ⇒ inv (Term boolT) \| A ⇒ case (Term boolT) (Term A)
(Term A) func normalize (t : TermTy) ( x : Term t) : termTy t \| natT,
nat n ⇒ n \| natT, succ n ⇒ suc (normalize natT n) \| boolT, bool b ⇒ b
\| boolT, inv b ⇒ not (normalize boolT b) \| t, case b x y ⇒ ifElse
(normalize boolT b) (normalize t x ) (normalize t y) In the general
case, only when the indices are in canonical constructor form (say,
generated by references to parameters of the constructor and
applications to constructors) can we translate them into simpler index
types. Even though we could use auxiliary types to help us encoding
them, there is still one case where this encoding will fail, where the
indices contain references to the parameters of the indexed type. The
simplest case is the identity type: data Id (A : Type ℓ) (x : A) : A →
Type ℓ where idp : Id A x x The index being x, a reference to the
parameter of Id, is the essential reason why a general term unification
needs to be performed during the pattern matching over idp. Pattern
matching is a mechanism to match terms by patterns, not by terms.
Simpler indexed type essentially simplifies the problem of constructor
selection just by turning the term-match-term problem to a
term-match-pattern problem, which rules out numerous complication but
also loses the benefit of general indexed types. A potential way to
bring general indexed types back without introducing them directly is
discussed as future work in §4.1, requiring the presence of a built-in
identity type. 3.2. Translation to indexed types. We could translate
simpler indexed types back to general indexed types. To describe the
translation, we define the syntax of general indexed types, which is the
output of the translation, in Fig. 3.1. We do not have type parameters
as they are just special cases of indices.

10

TESLA ZHANG

decl ′ ::= cons′ ::=

data D ∆ cons′ \|c:A

indexed type constructor

F IGURE 3.1. Syntax of general indexed types Now we can start the
translation. First, we unify pattern matching constructors with simple
constructors. For constructor c ∆c in simpler indexed type D ∆, we
translate it into a pattern matching constructor vars(∆) ⇒ c ∆c . After
that, we could perform the translation of constructors. In other words,
we need to construct the type ("A" in Fig. 3.1) of the translated
constructor. Definition 3.1. For pattern matching constructor p ⇒ c ∆c ,
we construct the type of the translated constructor as vars( p) ∆c → D
term( p).



This type is a pi type consisting of the following major components: (1)
vars( p): the bindings in the patterns. We turn these bindings into
parameters of the translated type. (2) ∆c : the constructor parameters.
They are typed under the bindings in vars( p), so we append the original
parameters to the tail of these required bindings. (3) D term( p): the
return type. We specialize the indices of D with the terms correspond to
p. These terms are typed under vars( p), which is available in the
domain of this pi type. Theorem 3.2 (Completeness). Every simpler
indexed type can be translated into general indexed types. Proof. This
translation is defined for all simpler indexed types, so we get the
completeness theorem for free.  Theorem 3.3 (Well-typedness). The type
of the translated constructor is well-scoped and well-typed. Proof.
First, it indeed returns a specialization of the type D. According to
Fig. 2.6, types in ∆c are well-typed with references to the bindings in
p, but not in ∆. These bindings are available in vars( p). According to
Fig. 2.4, the well-typedness of D term( p) requires term( p) : ∆, and 
we know it is true by lemma 2.2. Theorem 3.4 (Soundness). The translated
constructor needs to be matched if and only if the original constructor
needs to be matched. The translated constructor does not need to be
matched if and only if the original constructor does not need to be
matched. The translated constructor cannot be matched if and only if the
original constructor cannot be matched. Proof. This theorem actually
requires a bit more information to be well-defined -- we have not given
the general indexed types typing rules and semantics. However, since the
result of term( p) is only generated by applications to constructors and
references (by definition), we only need to deal with the unification

A SIMPLER ENCODING OF INDEXED TYPES

11

of these terms, which are quite simple. They should be structurally
equivalent to the rules in Fig. 2.5. Restricting the unification problem
to this smaller subset makes the soundness  theorem provable by
induction on the patterns p. Remark 3.5. This translation is also useful
in the type checking of the constructors of simpler indexed types. When
we have a reference to such constructor without any argument supplied,
we could synthesize a type for this reference -- and we use the type in
definition 3.1.



3.3. Compilation and erasure. The compilation of simpler indexed types
has an advantage over normal indexed types. In \[11\], they used
detagging and forcing optimizations to erase the indices during
compilation. These methods are directly expressible in our syntax as the
indices are not even quantified in the constructors (see the examples in
§1, where the implicit argument n in the Agda version of fzero, fsuc are
not present in the corresponding definition as simpler indexed types).
In other words, simpler indexed types enjoy the benefit of index erasure
without any nontrivial compilation technique. One downside is that there
will not be inaccessible patterns \[11\], so there will be redundant
pattern matching happening at runtime. Consider the example in §3.1, the
normalize function using simpler indexed type has two pattern matchings,
while the normalize function using general indexed types has only one.
In conclusion, simpler indexed types are more memory efficient than
general indexed types without optimizations, while they require
redundant pattern matchings. We think of the latter as a potential
future work. 4. C ONCLUSION We introduced a simpler encoding of indexed
types in dependent type systems. It reuses the pattern matching for
constructor selection to avoid exposing the index unification problem to
the users. A number of existing indexed types such as Fin and Vect can
be encoded in this simpler way, but not all (exceptions include the
identity type in Agda \[2\] and the examples in §1.1). 4.1. Future work.
We could translate simpler indexed types into an even simpler type
theory with only products and coproducts, just like in \[12\]. This
translation requires an algorithm to classify the pattern matching
clauses with overlapping parts. This is done in \[13\], but in Aya we
have a better implementation. We decide to describe such translation
after the overlapping pattern classification algorithm is formalized. We
could also have a built-in identity type in the type theory and encode
the indexed types with the identity type. The Image type in \[12\] is a
great example: data Image (A B : Type ℓ) (f : A → B) : B → Type ℓ where
image : ∀ x → Image A B f (f x) It can be encoded as an inductive type
without indices: data Image ( A B : U ) ( f : A → B) (b : B) : U \|
image ( x : A) ( p : f x = b) We might be able to define a translation
from general indexed types into simpler indexed types with a built-in
identity type, and during pattern matching over

12

TESLA ZHANG

the encoded types, we perform a rewriting over the identity proofs that
we used to encode the indices. By that, we will have a different
treatment of the index unification problem, and we could study how it
compares to the general indexed types. This idea (encoding the
unification of type indices as a rewriting performed during pattern
matching) is similar to the transpX operation discussed in \[14, §3.2.4,
§4\] and the "index-fixing" fcoe operation discussed in \[15, §4.2\],
but we are working in a general type theory with any definition of the
identity type as long as they support the J operation, including the
path type in homotopy type theory \[16\], the path type in cubical type
theories \[17, 15, 18\], the identity type in intuitionistic type theory
\[19\] (either homogeneous or heterogeneous), and others. The cubical
path type is a preferred choice as it does not depend on any fancy
unification mechanism. This means we can develop a type theory
expressive enough to discuss indexed types without dependent pattern
matching. Apart from that, we could seek integration with
induction-recursion \[9\] and induction-induction \[10\] as mentioned in
§2.4. The compilation technique could be investigated to address the
limitation discussed in §3.3. 4.2. Related work. Type families in
dependent types can be regarded as an encoding of GADTs \[20\]. This
idea was then put into a simpler type system (H-M) in \[21\], and was
developed further as first-class phantom types in \[22\] and guarded
recursive type constructors in \[23\]. \[24\] used Leibniz-style
encoding of equality to reason over the equality among types for
building well-typed and well-scoped syntax trees. GADTs are integrated
into GHC Haskell in \[25\]. Indexed types \[26\] are the generalization
of inductive types with type-equality, where values are also allowed to
appear as parameters of inductive types. Agda \[2\] and Idris \[27\]
have a more ergonomic design of indexed types where the equality
relations are made implicit. In \[12\], the type-family encoding of the
sized vector type is discussed and is directly related to simpler
indexed types. However, there are several key advantages of simpler
indexed types over the record encoding given in \[12\]:

• Simpler indexed types have names for the types and constructors. The
record encoding anonymizes the type and the constructors, so the error
messages are harder to understand. • The pattern matching in simpler
indexed type does not need to be covering. For instance, the simpler
indexed type Fin zero is implicitly an empty type, while encoding it as
a function requires writing an explicit pattern matching clause zero =
⊥. • Similar to coverage, pattern matching in simpler indexed types does
not need to be structurally recursive. The record encoding uses
functions so we need to respect the rules for functions, including
persuading the termination checker. Another work related to the encoding
of indexed types is \[28, §5\], where they propose an encoding similar
to the Image example proposed in §4.1 and discuss a potential
optimization to indexed types similar to \[12\]. The advantages of
simpler indexed types over \[12\] still applies to the encoding in
\[28\]. A notable application of indexed types based on \[28\] is
ornaments \[29, 30\].

REFERENCES

13

The proposed feature has been implemented in two systems individually: •
The Arend \[31\] proof assistant, an implementation of homotopy type
theory with a cubical-flavored interval type. • The Aya \[3\] proof
assistant, an experimental implementation of a type theory similar to
Arend's, but with other features such as overlapping and
order-independent patterns \[13\]. All of the operations (except vars(∆)
-- it is too simple to be a class) in §2.2 have a corresponding class in
the package org.aya.core.pat in the source code of Aya: vars( p)
corresponds to PatTyper, term( p) corresponds to PatToTerm, matches(u,
p) corresponds to PatMatcher. Apart from that, the type checking of
terms in Fig. 2.4 corresponds to ExprTycker, the type checking of
patterns in Fig. 2.5 corresponds to PatTycker, and the type checking of
declarations in Fig. 2.2 corresponds to StmtTycker. The source code of
Aya could be retrieved from the link in the corresponding reference
entry. The complete normalizer example in §3.1 is available at
https://github.com/ayaprover/aya-dev/blob/main/base/src/test/resources/success/type-safe-norm.
aya as a test-case of the Aya type checker. 4.3. Acknowledgments. We are
grateful to Yu Zhang and Yiming Zhu for their suggestions on the draft
version of this paper and Guillaume Allais for their review on an
earlier version of this paper. We would also like to thank the anonymous
reviewers from the ICFP TyDe workshop for their valuable suggestions on
improving the paper. R EFERENCES \[1\] Guillaume Allais et
al. "Type-and-Scope Safe Programs and Their Proofs". In: Proceedings of
the 6th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs. CPP
2017. Paris, France: Association for Computing Machinery, 2017,
pp. 195--207. ISBN: 9781450347051. DOI: 10.1145/3018610.3018613. \[2\]
Ulf Norell. "Dependently Typed Programming in Agda". In: Proceedings of
the 4th International Workshop on Types in Language Design and
Implementation. TLDI '09. Savannah, GA, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 1--2. ISBN:
978-1-60558-420-1. DOI: 10.1145/1481861.1481862. \[3\] Aya developers.
The Aya Proof Assistant. https://github.com/aya-prover/ aya-dev. 2021.
\[4\] Jesper Cockx, Dominique Devriese, and Frank Piessens. "Pattern
Matching without K". In: Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGPLAN
International Conference on Functional Programming. ICFP '14.
Gothenburg, Sweden: Association for Computing Machinery, 2014,
pp. 257--268. ISBN: 9781450328739. DOI: 10.1145/2628136.2628139. \[5\]
Jesper Cockx, Dominique Devriese, and Frank Piessens. "Unifiers as
Equivalences: Proof-Relevant Unification of Dependently Typed Data". In:
Proceedings of the 21st ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on
Functional Programming. ICFP 2016. Nara, Japan: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2016, pp. 270--283. ISBN: 9781450342193. DOI:
10.1145/2951913.2951917. \[6\] Jesper Cockx and Andreas Abel.
"Elaborating Dependent (Co)Pattern Matching". In: Proc. ACM Program.
Lang. 2.ICFP (July 2018). DOI: 10.1145/3236770.

14

REFERENCES

\[7\] Kaveh (https://mathoverflow.net/users/7507/kaveh). History of the
notation for substitution. MathOverflow. 2018. URL:
https://mathoverflow.net/ q/243084. \[8\] Healfdene Goguen, Conor
McBride, and James McKinna. "Eliminating Dependent Pattern Matching".
In: Algebra, Meaning, and Computation: Essays dedicated to Joseph A.
Goguen on the Occasion of His 65th Birthday. Ed. by Kokichi Futatsugi,
Jean-Pierre Jouannaud, and José Meseguer. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 521--540. ISBN: 978-3-540-35464-2. DOI:
10.1007/11780274_27. \[9\] Peter Dybjer. "A General Formulation of
Simultaneous Inductive-Recursive Definitions in Type Theory". In:
Journal of Symbolic Logic 65 (June 2003). DOI: 10.2307/2586554. \[10\]
Fredrik Nordvall Forsberg and Anton Setzer. "Inductive-inductive
definitions". In: International Workshop on Computer Science Logic.
Springer. 2010, pp. 454--468. \[11\] Edwin Brady, Conor McBride, and
James McKinna. "Inductive Families Need Not Store Their Indices". In:
Types for Proofs and Programs. Ed. by Stefano Berardi, Mario Coppo, and
Ferruccio Damiani. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004,
pp. 115--129. ISBN: 978-3-540-24849-1. \[12\] Jesper Cockx, Gaëtan
Gilbert, and Nicolas Tabareau. "Vectors are records, too". In: TYPES
2018 (2018). \[13\] Jesper Cockx, Frank Piessens, and Dominique
Devriese. "Overlapping and Order-Independent Patterns". In: Programming
Languages and Systems. Ed. by Zhong Shao. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2014, pp. 87-- 106. ISBN: 978-3-642-54833-8. \[14\]
Andrea Vezzosi, Anders Mörtberg, and Andreas Abel. "Cubical Agda: A
Dependently Typed Programming Language with Univalence and Higher
Inductive Types". Preprint available at https://staff.math.su.se/anders.
mortberg/papers/cubicalagda2.pdf. 2020. \[15\] Evan Cavallo and Robert
Harper. "Higher Inductive Types in Cubical Computational Type Theory".
In: Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 3.POPL (Jan. 2019). DOI: 10.1145/3290314.
\[16\] The Univalent Foundations Program. Homotopy Type Theory:
Univalent Foundations of Mathematics. Institute for Advanced Study:
https://homotopytypetheory. org/book, 2013. \[17\] Cyril Cohen et
al. "Cubical Type Theory: A Constructive Interpretation of the
Univalence Axiom". In: FLAP 4 (2015), pp. 3127--3170. \[18\] Andrea
Vezzosi, Anders Mörtberg, and Andreas Abel. "Cubical Agda: A Dependently
Typed Programming Language with Univalence and Higher Inductive Types".
In: Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 3.ICFP (July 2019). DOI: 10.1145/3341691.
\[19\] Per Martin-Löf. "An intuitionistic theory of types: predicative
part". In: Logic Colloquium '73, Proceedings of the Logic Colloquium.
Ed. by H.E. Rose and J.C. Shepherdson. Vol. 80. Studies in Logic and the
Foundations of Mathematics. North-Holland, 1975, pp. 73--118. \[20\]
Thierry Coquand. "Pattern matching with dependent types". In:
Proceedings of the Workshop on Types for Proofs and Programs. Citeseer.
1992, pp. 71--83. \[21\] Lennart Augustsson and Kent Petersson. "Silly
Type Families DRAFT". In: (1994).

REFERENCES

15

\[22\] Hongwei Xi, Chiyan Chen, and Gang Chen. "Guarded Recursive
Datatype Constructors". In: Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT
Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages. POPL '03. New Orleans,
Louisiana, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2003, pp. 224--235.
ISBN: 1581136285. DOI: 10.1145/604131.604150. \[23\] James Cheney and
Ralf Hinze. First-class phantom types. Tech. rep. Cornell University,
2003. \[24\] Tim Sheard and Emir Pasalic. "Meta-programming With
Built-in Type Equality". In: Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer
Science 199 (2008). Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on
Logical Frameworks and MetaLanguages (LFM 2004), pp. 49--65. ISSN:
1571-0661. DOI: 10.1016/j.entcs.2007.11.012. \[25\] Dimitrios
Vytiniotis, Stephanie Weirich, and Simon Peyton Jones. "Simple
unification-based type inference for GADTs". In: International
Conference on Functional Programming (ICFP'06). 2016 ACM SIGPLAN Most
Influential ICFP Paper Award. ACM SIGPLAN. Apr. 2006. URL:
https://www.microsoft.
com/en-us/research/publication/simple-unification-based-type-inferencefor-gadts/.
\[26\] Christoph Zenger. "Indexed Types". In: Theor. Comput. Sci.
187.1--2 (Nov. 1997), pp. 147--165. ISSN: 0304-3975. DOI:
10.1016/S0304-3975(97)00062-5. \[27\] Edwin Brady. "Idris, a
general-purpose dependently typed programming language: Design and
implementation". In: Journal of Functional Programming 23 (05
Sept. 2013), pp. 552--593. ISSN: 1469-7653. DOI:
10.1017/S095679681300018X. URL :
http://journals.cambridge.org/article%5C_S095679681300018X. \[28\] James
Chapman et al. "The Gentle Art of Levitation". In: Proceedings of the
15th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming.
ICFP '10. Baltimore, Maryland, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2010, pp. 3--14. ISBN: 9781605587943. DOI: 10.1145/1863543.1863547.
\[29\] Pierre-Évariste Dagand and Conor McBride. "Transporting functions
across ornaments". In: Journal of Functional Programming 24.2-3 (2014),
pp. 316--383. DOI: 10.1017/S0956796814000069. \[30\] HsiangShang Ko and
Jeremy Gibbons. "Programming with ornaments". In: Journal of Functional
Programming 27 (2016), e2. DOI: 10.1017/S0956796816000307. \[31\] Group
for Dependent Types and HoTT. The Arend Proof Assistant. https://
arend-lang.github.io. JetBrains Research, 2015. T HE P ENNSYLVANIA S
TATE U NIVERSITY Email address: yqz5714@psu.edu


